<!-- MICHIGAN: applicant's background and life experiences, including cultural, geographical, financial, and educational or other opportunities or challenges, motivated the decision to pursue a graduate degree at the University of Michigan -->
I discovered computer science, and eventually machine learning, through mathematics. I love the complexity, the concreteness, and the rigor of mathematics. In college, I could dwell in a proof for hours, sometimes days; the eventual flash of knowledge was ecstatic. Other fields, like philosophy, offer complexity, but math transcends opinion and achieves real knowledge. Each concrete discovery builds on the last. The sense of progress is addictive.

At St. John's College, I studied primary texts in mathematics, science, philosophy, and literature, spanning ancient times to the twentieth century. All classes were discussions, and we immersed ourselves in the great ideas we were reading, exploring their structures meticulously. This study taught me to appreciate the way thought changes over time and drew my attention to the pitfalls of scientific hubris, the tendency toward unacknowledged assumptions, and the indispensability of maverick insight.

Freshman year, reading Euclid rekindled an earlier fascination with mathematical proof that grew steadily through college. One of my most exciting memories is studying non-Euclidean geometry and confronting the reality that, without contradiction, straight lines could converge without meeting. That such a seeming paradox could be true was mysterious and wonderful. I wrote my senior thesis on the first of Richard Dedekind’s Essays on the Theory of Numbers, and audited Calculus II at the Naval Academy.

After college, as a Marine Officer, I learned to lead people, manage projects, and, within broad guidelines, achieve results. In the Marine Corps, I combined a new practical set of skills with the skills of intellect that I gained at St. John’s. As an Officer I faced experiences that were completely foreign. Before the Marine Corps, I had played few team sports and spent little time in the outdoors. In my first few months in training, I led patrols in hostile villages, held a Jirga with Afghan-roleplayers and a translator, and conducted live-fire exercises in urban settings. I graduated every training school in the top fifth of my class and, on performance evaluations, consistently ranked among the best of my peers.

After completing my officer training, I hoped to continue my studies, but every math class near my new duty station met during work hours. So I began to take the free courses that MIT offers on the OpenCourseWare website. I found time for math before and after work and took my workbook on exercises to study during downtime. I completed courses in multivariable calculus, differential equations, and linear algebra, including all readings, assignments, and exams. I discovered computer science through the MIT course, “Artificial Intelligence.” Many excited calls home ensued. I found Python and Java classes online, and began to teach myself code.

At Penn, my interest in machine learning and especially deep learning clarified itself very quickly. During my time in the military, I taught myself a little about neural networks, but the entire field of machine learning still seemed like a dark art. During the Fall semester, I took a course in Machine Learning and certain questions took shape in my mind that I expect to spend my life trying to answer.

I saw machine learning as a way to understand cognition. I was interested in the principles that made cognition possible, not necessarily the low-level details of the brain, as studied by neuroscience. On the other hand, fields like psychology or philosophy had too little traction on the details of process and mechanism. Machine learning addressed an important issue that is at the heart of cognition, namely pattern recognition---a fundamental mechanism, it seems, for compressing the overwhelming volume of sense data. However, traditional machine learning seemed to be concerned exclusively with this problem.

In contrast, deep learning seemed to provide building-blocks for the full range of cognitive mechanisms. Before deep learning, neural networks hardly distinguished themselves among a host of pattern-matching algorithms. Deep learning repurposed them as building-blocks that researchers could combine into structures of arbitrary complexity and functionality. In these universal function approximators, deep learning had perhaps discovered the fundamental unit of learning, the DNA of cognition itself.

In combination, they can learn arbitrary functionality, not conditioned on the details of the layer's structure but on the flow of information through them.  combine linear, nonlinear, and affine transformations to approximate functions universally. With this This is in fact because of its simplicity: the building-blocks of a deep network are three simple transformations  


It seemed possibe Though I discovered deep learning during its ascent to preeminence, my attraction had little to do with the hype. I   Mathematics had fascinated me with complex systems built from simple, powerful axioms. Similarly, a deep network can learn to perform incredibly complex inference, despite having very simple components: An individual layer of a neural network comprises three transformations -- linear, affine, and nonlinear. Despite their simplicity, these transformations can, in combination, approximate any function.

The principles that organize a deep network are also simple but powerful. First, we have the mechanism of _recursion_, an incredibly powerful tool for expressing _hierarchy_...

Unlike traditional machine learning, whose techniques seem eternally bound to specific applications, deep learning seems to unearth concepts that are fundamental to _cognition itself_. For example, the organizing principle of a neural network

I was drawn to ideas themselves, more than their application. Deep Learning in particular








 *In addition, the Marine Corps showed me the critical role of computer automation—for example, the use of SharePoint to manage workflows—in a large organization. As a computer scientist, I will constantly call on the perspective I gained in this capacity because, in my observation, a computer program is only as powerful as the ability of the user to make sense of it and incorporate it into practice.*


My interest in machine learning and actually computer science in general began in philosophy. During college, I studied many different kinds of philosophy, including ethics, ontology (the study of being), and aesthetics. But to me, epistemology, the study of knowing, was primary to all of these. I found the aperture more interesting than the scene.

A second formative interest was mathematics. Though I developed a deep appreciation for the questions that philosophy posed, their _undecidability_ was always a source of dissatisfaction. In contrast,
oEthan Brooks
14 Aulike St Kailua HI 96734 • (717) 380-9441 • ethanabrooks@gmail.com

Personal Statement
I discovered computer science through mathematics. I love the complexity, the concreteness, and the rigor of mathematics. I can dwell in a proof for hours, sometimes days; the eventual flash of knowledge is ecstatic. Other fields, like philosophy, offer complexity, but math transcends opinion and achieves real knowledge. Each concrete discovery builds on the last. The sense of progress is addictive.
Not long ago, I found that all this was true of programming as well. When, after countless attempts, my first difficult code ran, I could not repress a primal howl. Coding, I have discovered, also has a critical element that math does not: design. I grew up an avid Lego builder and then an aspiring architect. Programming marries these creative impulses with mathematics. As a programmer, I will be able to design products both beautiful and complex that I can share with an appreciative world.
A little about my background: At St. John’s College I studied primary texts in mathematics, science, philosophy, and literature, spanning ancient times to the twentieth century. All classes were discussions, and we immersed ourselves in the great ideas we were reading, exploring their structures meticulously. This study taught me to appreciate the way thought changes over time and drew my attention to the pitfalls of scientific hubris, the tendency toward unacknowledged assumptions, and the indispensability of maverick insight. After college, as a Marine Officer, I learned to lead people, manage projects, and, within broad guidelines, achieve results. In the Marine Corps, I combined a new practical set of skills with the skills of intellect that I gained at St. John’s. In addition, the Marine Corps showed me the critical role of computer automation—for example, the use of SharePoint to manage workflows—in a large organization. As a computer scientist, I will constantly call on the perspective I gained in this capacity because, in my observation, a computer program is only as powerful as the ability of the user to make sense of it and incorporate it into practice.
While I am proud of the record evident in my transcript, my test scores, and my recommendations, I acknowledge that my freshman and sophomore grades are below the standard I have strived for elsewhere in life. Having just spent seven months in training with the Marine Corps, I had difficulty adjusting to college culture as a freshman. With time, I matured and developed a strong work ethic, a story told by the steady rise of my grades through the years and my endeavors outside class: by senior year, I was leading a Crossfit Club I had founded, running monthly volunteer trips for Habitat for Humanity, drilling monthly with the Marines, and auditing a course at the Naval Academy (near St. John’s), all while maintaining a 3.89 GPA.
While college took some adjustment, as an Officer I faced experiences that were completely foreign. Before the Marine Corps, I had played few team sports and spent little time in the outdoors. In my first few months in training, I led patrols in hostile villages, held a Jirga with Afghans and a translator, and conducted live-fire exercises in urban settings. I graduated every training school in the top fifth of my class and, on performance evaluations, consistently ranked among the best of my peers.

How did these experiences produce an interest in machine learning? At St. John’s, Euclid rekindled an earlier fascination with mathematical proof that grew steadily through college. One of my most exciting memories is studying non-Euclidean geometry and confronting the reality that, without contradiction, straight lines could converge without meeting. That such a seeming paradox could be true was mysterious and wonderful. I wrote my senior thesis on the first of Richard Dedekind’s Essays on the Theory of Numbers, and audited Calculus II at the Naval Academy. After completing my officer training, I hoped to continue my studies, but every math class near my new duty station met during work hours. So I began to take the free courses that MIT offers on the OpenCourseWare website. I found time for math before and after work and took my workbook on exercises to study during downtime. I completed courses in multivariable calculus, differential equations, and linear algebra, including all readings, assignments, and exams. I discovered computer science through the MIT course, “Artificial Intelligence.” Many excited calls home ensued. I found Python and Java classes on Codecademy.com and Udacity.com, and began to teach myself code.

I have spent the past year researching graduate programs and none is better suited to my background and interests than the Master of Computer and Information Technology at the University of Pennsylvania. During my recent campus visits, the thoughtfulness of the students, the quality of the teachers, and the warmth of the community left a deep impression on me. After MCIT, I may consider applying to the MSE program or a doctoral program in order to further explore topics of interest. I am particularly curious about artificial intelligence and the work of Dr. Mitch Marcus on programs that understand human language and use environmental context to interpret meaning.

A career in computer science will be the culmination of the manifold experiences I have described. At St. John’s, I planted intellectual roots and seeds of curiosity. In the Marine Corps, I learned to put intellect into action. Throughout, I have demonstrated commitment to my passions: it would be much easier to go to business school after leaving the Marine Corps. I have explored that option, but the truth is, it’s not what excites me. I have never compromised my pursuit of intellectual fulfillment and I have beaten a new path when a traveled road did not exist. While pursuing a degree at Penn among other ambitious scholars, immersed in a subject that has completely engrossed me, I anticipate a new level of fulfillment.
